Overhaul "Learn Shiny" content to be Express focused (#68)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/ui-dynamic.qmd

title: Dynamic UI
---

It's often useful to programmatically update the UI based on user input or other server-side state.
Shiny provides several mechanisms for doing this, including conditional UI, updating inputs, and dynamic UI.
Amongst these [dynamic UI](#dynamic-ui) is the most general and powerful, but also comes with the most overhead.

### Conditional UI

> Often times it's useful to show or hide UI components based on some condition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most basic way to create dynamic UIs is by conditionally hiding a UI element on the client side.
```

> `ui.panel_conditional()` enables this by showing/hiding UI based on a whether a JavaScript condition is truthy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ui.panel_conditional()` enables this by showing/hiding UI based on a JavaScript condition.
```

> This condition can reference input values, and used to make any sort of UI conditional (not just a string as done here).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This condition can reference input values, and can be used to make any sort of UI conditional.
```

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
#| viewerHeight: 100

from shiny.express import ui

ui.input_radio_buttons("display", None, ["hidden", "shown"], inline=True)

# The 1st string is a JavaScript condition, and the child UI is shown if it's truthy
# NOTE: JS input values are read via `input[id]`, not `input[id]()`
with ui.panel_conditional("input.display === 'shown'"):
    "Hidden content"
```

### Updating inputs

> Updating inputs server-side is useful for updating input parameters that are usually hard-coded in the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to hiding elements on the client side, you can also update elements from the server. This is used in cases where you want to change on part of a ui element without regenerating the whole element. For example you might want to change `ui.input_select` choices when a user takes a particular action.
```

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
#| viewerHeight: 200

from shiny import reactive
from shiny.express import input, ui

CHOICES = {
  "lower": ["a", "b", "c"],
  "upper": ["A", "B", "C"]
}

ui.input_switch("uppercase", "Uppercase choices", value=False)
ui.input_selectize("x", None, choices=CHOICES["lower"])

@reactive.effect
def _():
    choices = "upper" if input.uppercase() else "lower"
    ui.update_selectize("x", choices=CHOICES[choices])
```

### Dynamic UI {#dynamic-ui}

> Dynamic UI is a powerful feature that enables dynamic (i.e., server-side) rendering of any UI component(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, `ui.output_ui` lets you generate a ui element entirely on the server side, which is an extremely flexible way to dynamically generate UI elements. 
```

Like any other output, start with a container for output (via `ui.output_ui()`), and then apply `@render.ui` to a function that returns UI component(s).

> Here, for a starting example, we'll recreate the previous example using dynamic UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use this to recreate the previous example using dynamic UI.
```

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
#| viewerHeight: 250
from shiny.express import input, render, ui

ui.input_text("message", "Message", value="Hello, world!")

ui.input_checkbox_group(
  "styles", "Styles",
  choices=["Bold", "Italic"],
  selected=["Bold"],
  inline=True
)

@render.ui
def result():
    x = input.message()
    if "Bold" in input.styles():
        x = ui.strong(x)
    if "Italic" in input.styles():
        x = ui.em(x)
    return x
```

::: callout-warning
## Render UI vs display

Shiny Express code that works via side-effects needs to be used with `@render.display`, not `@render.ui`. See [this section](express-motivation.qmd#reactive-express-displays) to learn more.
:::

::: callout-tip

Anything that's statically renderable can also be rendered dynamically (e.g.,
`ui.markdown()`, `ui.HTML()`, `ui.div()`, inputs, outputs, etc).
:::

::: callout-warning
## Dynamic UI vs. updating inputs vs. conditional UI

> Dynamic UI is a more general mechanism than the updating inputs and conditional UI patterns, and can be used to update any UI component(s) (not just inputs). However, updating inputs is more efficient than dynamic UI, and should be preferred when possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic UI is a more general mechanism than the updating inputs and conditional UI patterns, and can be used to update any UI component(s) (not just inputs). However, updating inputs is more efficient than dynamic UI, and should be preferred where possible.
```
